docs: revise "how to run external codes" (#4208)
aiidateam/aiida-core: docs/source/howto/plugin_codes.rst

This how-to takes you through the process of :ref:`creating a calculation plugin<how-to:plugin-codes:interfacing>` for a simple executable that sums two numbers, using it to :ref:`run the code<how-to:plugin-codes:run>`, and :ref:`writing a parser <how-to:plugin-codes:parsing>` for its outputs.

In the following, as an example, our |Code| will be the `bash` executable, and our "input file" will be a `bash` script ``aiida.in`` that sums two numbers and prints the result:

.. code-block:: bash

   echo $(( numx + numy ))

We will run this as:

.. code-block:: bash

    /bin/bash < aiida.in > aiida.out

thus writing the sum of the two numbers ``numx`` and ``numy`` (provided by the user) to the output file ``aiida.out``.

.. todo::

    Add to preceding sentence: :ref:`the communication with external machines<how-to:plugin-codes:transport>` and the interaction with its :ref:`scheduling software<how-to:plugin-codes:scheduler>`.

.. _how-to:plugin-codes:interfacing:

Interfacing external codes
==========================

Start your ``calcjob.py`` script by subclassing the |CalcJob| class:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/calculations/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python

>     :lines: 10-18

Author: One problem are the type annotations - the corresponding classes all need to be imported as well.
Either we remove them for this "demo plugin" or I think we should provide the corresponding imports here as well to save time.

 #. :py:meth:`~aiida.engine.processes.calcjobs.calcjob.CalcJob.define`
 #. :py:meth:`~aiida.engine.processes.calcjobs.calcjob.CalcJob.prepare_for_submission`

Defining the spec
-----------------

The |define| method tells AiiDA which inputs the |CalcJob| expects and which outputs it produces (exit codes will be :ref:`discussed later<how-to:plugin-codes:parsing:errors>`).
This is done through an instance of the :py:class:`~aiida.engine.processes.process_spec.CalcJobProcessSpec` class, which is passed as the |spec| argument to the |define| method.
For example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/calculations/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python
    :pyobject: ArithmeticAddCalculation.define

The first line of the method calls the |define| method of the |CalcJob| parent class.
This necessary step defines the `inputs` and `outputs` that are common to all |CalcJob|'s.

Next, we use the :py:meth:`~plumpy.process_spec.ProcessSpec.input` method in order to define our two input numbers ``x`` and ``y`` (we support integers and floating point numbers), and we use :py:meth:`~plumpy.process_spec.ProcessSpec.output` to define an output of the calculation with label ``'sum'``.

> Once a calculation finishes, any output node specified here will be linked to the calculation node with the specified link label.

Author: ```suggestion
AiiDA will attach the outputs defined here to a (successfully) finished calculation using the link label provided.

.. note::
    This holds for *required* outputs (the default).
    Use ``required=False`` in order to mark an output as optional.
```

These ``options`` have already been defined on the |spec| by the ``super().define(spec)`` call, and they can be accessed through the :py:attr:`~plumpy.process_spec.ProcessSpec.inputs` attribute, which behaves like a dictionary.

.. note::

    One more important input required by any |CalcJob| is which external executable to use.
    External executables are represented by |Code|  instances that contain information about the computer they reside on, their path in the file system and more.

    They are passed to a |CalcJob| via the ``code`` input (defined in the |CalcJob| base class, so you don't have to)::

        spec.input('code', valid_type=orm.Code, help='The `Code` to use for this job.')

There is no ``return`` statement in ``define``: the ``define`` method directly modifies the |spec| object it receives.
For more details on setting up your `inputs` and `outputs` (covering validation, dynamic number of inputs, etc.) see the :ref:`Defining Processes <topics:processes:usage:defining>` topic.

Preparing for submission
------------------------

The :py:meth:`~aiida.engine.processes.calcjobs.calcjob.CalcJob.prepare_for_submission` method has two jobs:

> Firstly, it creates the input files in the format the external code expects.
> And secondly, it returns a :py:class:`~aiida.common.datastructures.CalcInfo` object that contains instructions for the AiiDA engine on how the code should be run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating the input files in the format the external code expects and returning a :py:class:`~aiida.common.datastructures.CalcInfo` object that contains instructions for the AiiDA engine on how the code should be run.
```

For example:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/calculations/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python
    :pyobject: ArithmeticAddCalculation.prepare_for_submission

.. note:: Unlike the |define| method, the ``prepare_for_submission`` method is implemented from scratch and so there is no super call.

> The first step is writing the simple bash script mentioned in the beginning: summing the numbers ``x`` and ``y``, using Python's string interpolation to replace the ``x`` and ``y`` placeholders with the actual values ``self.inputs.x`` and ``self.inputs.y`` that were passed by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step is writing the simple bash script mentioned in the beginning: summing the numbers ``x`` and ``y``, using Python's string interpolation to replace the ``x`` and ``y`` placeholders with the actual values ``self.inputs.x`` and ``self.inputs.y`` that were passed in the inputs by the caller.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The first step is writing the simple bash script mentioned in the beginning: summing the numbers ``x`` and ``y``, using Python's string interpolation to replace the ``x`` and ``y`` placeholders with the actual values ``self.inputs.x`` and ``self.inputs.y`` that were provided as inputs by the caller.
```

All inputs provided to the calculation are validated against the ``spec`` *before* |prepare_for_submission| is called.

> When accessing the :py:attr:`~plumpy.processes.Process.inputs` attribute, you can therefore safely assume that all required inputs have been set and that all inputs have a valid type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, when accessing the :py:attr:`~plumpy.processes.Process.inputs` attribute, you can safely assume that all required inputs have been set and that all inputs have a valid type.
```

After having written the necessary input files, we let AiiDA know how to run the code via the |CodeInfo| object.

First, we forward the ``uuid`` of the |Code|  instance passed by the user via the generic ``code`` input mentioned previously (in this example, the ``code`` will represent a ``bash`` executable).

Second, let's recall how we want our executable to be run:

.. code-block:: bash

    #!/bin/bash

    '[executable path in code node]' < '[input_filename]' > '[output_filename]'

We want to pass our input file to the executable via standard input, and record standard output of the executable in the output file -- this is done using the ``stdin_name`` and ``stdout_name`` attributes of the |CodeInfo|.

.. tip::

     Many executables don't read from standard input but instead require the path to an input file to be passed via command line parameters (potentially including further configuration options).
     In that case, use the |CodeInfo| ``cmdline_params`` attribute:

     .. code-block:: python

         codeinfo.cmdline_params = ['--input', self.inputs.input_filename]

.. tip::

>     ``self.inputs.input_filename`` is just a shorthand for ``self.inputs.metadata['options']['input_filename']``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ``self.options.input_filename`` is just a shorthand for ``self.inputs.metadata['options']['input_filename']``.
```

Finally, we pass the |CodeInfo| to a |CalcInfo| object (one calculation job can involve more than one executable, so ``codes_info`` is a list).
We define the ``retrieve_list`` of filenames that the engine should retrieve from the directory where the job ran after it has finished.
The engine will store these files in a |FolderData| node that will be attached as an output node to the calculation with the label ``retrieved``.
There are :ref:`other file lists available<topics:calculations:usage:calcjobs:file_lists>` that allow you to easily customize how to move files to and from the remote working directory in order to prevent the creation of unnecessary copies.

This was an example of how to implement the |CalcJob| class to interface AiiDA with an external code.
For more details on the |CalcJob| class, refer to the Topics section on :ref:`defining calculations <topics:calculations:usage>`.

.. _how-to:plugin-codes:parsing:

Parsing the outputs
===================

> Parsing the output files produced by your code into AiiDA nodes is optional, but it can make your data queryable and therefore easier to access and analyze.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parsing the output files produced by a code into AiiDA nodes is optional, but it can make your data queryable and therefore easier to access and analyze.
```

> We start our ``parser.py`` plugin by subclassing the |Parser| class and implementing its :py:meth:`~aiida.parsers.parser.Parser.parse` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a parser plugin, subclass the |Parser| class (for example in a file called ``parser.py``) and implement its :py:meth:`~aiida.parsers.parser.Parser.parse` method.
The following is an example of a simple implementation:
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/parsers/plugins/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python
    :pyobject: SimpleArithmeticAddParser

Before the ``parse()`` method is called, two important attributes are set on the |Parser|  instance:

>   1. ``self.retrieved``: An instance of |FolderData|, which points to the folder containing all output files produced by the code and provides the means to :py:meth:`~aiida.orm.nodes.node.Node.open` any file it contains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. ``self.retrieved``: An instance of |FolderData|, which points to the folder containing all output files that the |CalcJob| instructed to retrieve, and provides the means to :py:meth:`~aiida.orm.nodes.node.Node.open` any file it contains.
```

>   2. ``self.node``: The :py:class:`~aiida.orm.nodes.process.calculation.calcjob.CalcJobNode` representing the finished calculation, which e.g. provides access to all of its inputs (``self.node.inputs``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. ``self.node``: The :py:class:`~aiida.orm.nodes.process.calculation.calcjob.CalcJobNode` representing the finished calculation, which, among other things, provides access to all of its inputs (``self.node.inputs``).
```

> We start by opening the output file, whose filename we get from the ``self.node`` attribute via the :py:meth:`~aiida.orm.nodes.process.calculation.calcjob.CalcJobNode.get_option` convenience method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output of the code is obtained by reading the content of the output file, whose filename we get from the ``self.node`` attribute via the :py:meth:`~aiida.orm.nodes.process.calculation.calcjob.CalcJobNode.get_option` convenience method.
The read content is cast to an integer, as it should contain the sum that was produced by the ``bash`` code.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The :py:meth:`~aiida.orm.nodes.process.calculation.calcjob.CalcJobNode.get_option` convenience method is used to get the filename of the output file.
Its content is cast to an integer, since the output file should contain the sum produced by the ``aiida.in`` bash script.
```

> We read the content of the file and cast it to an integer, which should contain the sum that was produced by the ``bash`` code.

Reviewer: delete this line

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Finally, we use the :py:meth:`~aiida.parsers.parser.Parser.out` method to link the parsed sum as an output of the calculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the :py:meth:`~aiida.parsers.parser.Parser.out` method is used to link the parsed sum as an output of the calculation.
```

The first argument is the name of the output, which will be used as the label for the link that connects the calculation and data node, and the second is the node that should be recorded as an output.
Note that the type of the output should match the type that is specified by the process specification of the corresponding |CalcJob|.
If any of the registered outputs do not match the specification, the calculation will be marked as failed.

In order to request automatic parsing of a |CalcJob| (once it has finished), users can set the ``metadata.options.parser_name`` input when launching the job.

> If a particular parser should *always* be used by default, the |CalcJob| ``define`` method can set a default value for the parser name as we did in the :ref:`previous section <how-to:plugin-codes:interfacing>`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a particular parser should be used by default, the |CalcJob| ``define`` method can set a default value for the parser name as was done in the :ref:`previous section <how-to:plugin-codes:interfacing>`:
```

        ...
        spec.inputs['metadata']['options']['parser_name'].default = 'arithmetic.add'

> Note, that we are not passing the |Parser| class itself, but an *entry point string* under which the parser class is registered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note, that the default is not set to the |Parser| class itself, but the *entry point string* under which the parser class is registered.
```

> How to register your parser class as an entry point is explained in the how-to section on :ref:`registering plugins <how-to:plugins>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How to register a parser class through an entry point is explained in the how-to section on :ref:`registering plugins <how-to:plugins>`.
```

.. _how-to:plugin-codes:parsing:errors:

Handling parsing errors
-----------------------

So far, we have not spent much attention on dealing with potential errors that can arise when running external codes.
However, there are lots of ways in which codes can fail to execute nominally.

> A |Parser| can play an important role in detecting such errors and reporting them to AiiDA, where :ref:`workflows <how-to:workflows>` can then decide how to proceed, e.g. by modifying input parameters and resubmitting the calculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A |Parser| can play an important role in detecting and communicating such errors, where :ref:`workflows <how-to:workflows>` can then decide how to proceed, e.g., by modifying input parameters and resubmitting the calculation.
```

Parsers communicate errors through :ref:`exit codes<topics:processes:concepts:exit_codes>`, which are defined in the |spec| of the |CalcJob| they parse.

> Our :py:class:`~aiida.calculations.arithmetic.add.ArithmeticAddCalculation` example, defines the following exit codes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :py:class:`~aiida.calculations.arithmetic.add.ArithmeticAddCalculation` example, defines the following exit codes:
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/calculations/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: start exit codes
    :end-before: end exit codes
    :dedent: 8

> Each ``exit_code`` defines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each ``exit_code`` defines:
```

 * an exit status (a positive integer),
 * a label that can be used to reference the code in the |parse| method (through the ``self.exit_codes`` property, as shown below), and
 * a message that provides a more detailed description of the problem.

In order to inform AiiDA about a failed calculation, simply return from the ``parse`` method the exit code that corresponds to the detected issue.

> Here is a more complete version of our |Parser|:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a more complete version of the example |Parser| presented in the previous section:
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../../aiida/parsers/plugins/arithmetic/add.py
    :language: python
    :pyobject: ArithmeticAddParser

It checks:

 1. Whether a retrieved folder is present.
 2. Whether the output file can be read (whether ``open()`` or ``read()`` will throw an ``OSError``).
 3. Whether the output file contains an integer.
 4. Whether the sum is negative.

> AiiDA stored the exit code returned by the |parse| method on the calculation node that is being parsed, from where it can then be inspected further down the line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AiiDA stores the exit code returned by the |parse| method on the calculation node that is being parsed, from where it can then be inspected further down the line.
```

.. _how-to:plugin-codes:run:

> Running your calculation
> ========================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running a calculation
=====================
```

With your ``calcjob.py`` and ``parser.py`` files at hand, you can launch your first calculation:

 1. If you haven't already done so, set up your localhost computer:

    .. code-block:: console

        $ verdi computer setup -L localhost -H localhost -T local -S direct -w `echo $PWD/work` -n

>         $ verdi computer configure local tutor --safe-interval 5 -n

Reviewer: have you tested these commands? I don't think `tutor` exists. Think that should be `localhost`.
Shouldn't this also just refer to a section that explains how to setup a computer?

Author: That should have been `verdi computer configure local localhost ...` 
I agree that we can refer to the computer setup section here, though.
Will change this.

Author: ```suggestion
        $ verdi computer configure local localhost --safe-interval 5 -n
```

 2. Write a first ``launch.py`` script:

    .. code-block:: python

        from aiida import orm, engine
        from calcjob import ArithmeticAddCalculation
        from parser import ArithmeticAddParser

        # Setting up inputs
        computer = orm.load_computer('localhost')
        code = orm.Code(remote_computer_exec=[computer, '/bin/bash'])
        resources = {
            'num_machines': 1,
            'num_mpiprocs_per_machine': 1,
        }
        inputs = {
            'code': code,
            'x': Int(4),
            'y': Int(5),
            'metadata': {

>                 'options': { 'resources': resources},

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                'options': {'resources': resources},
```

                'description': "My first calculation.",
            },
        }

        # Running the calculation
        _ , node = engine.run_get_node( ArithmeticAddCalculation, **inputs )
        print("Calculation completed: {}".format(node))

        # Parsing its results
        output_dict, node = ArithmeticAddParser.parse_from_node(node)

>         print("Parsing completed. Result: {}".format(int(output_dict['sum'])))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        print("Parsing completed. Result: {}".format(output_dict['sum'].value))
```

    .. note::

        If you already have your inputs in the database, load them using ``orm.load_node()`` or find them using the :ref:`QueryBuilder <how-to:data:find>`.

 3. Launch the calculation:

    .. code-block:: console

        $ verdi run launch.py

>     If everything goes well, this should print the results of your calculations, something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If everything goes well, this should print the results of your calculation, something like:
```

    .. code-block:: console

        $ verdi run launch.py
        Calculation completed: uuid: 607d50ba-5396-411c-8bac-563b71dbaff4 (pk: 229) (calcjob.ArithmeticAddCalculation)
        Parsing completed. Result: 9

.. tip::

    If you encountered a parsing error, it can be helpful to make a :ref:`topics:calculations:usage:calcjobs:dry_run`, which allows you to inspect the input folder generated by AiiDA before any calculation is launched.

> So far, we have deliberately avoided to touch the concept of :ref:`entry points <how-to:plugins:entrypoints>`, which are the preferred method of announcing new calculations, parsers and other plugins to AiiDA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far, we have deliberately avoided to touch the concept of :ref:`entry points <how-to:plugins:entrypoints>`, which are the preferred method of registering new calculation, parser and other plugins with AiiDA.
```

Using entry points simplifies your life in a number of ways:

 * You can use ``verdi plugin list`` to inspect which plugins are available as well as their internal documentation.
 * You can specify a default |Parser| for a |CalcJob|, which will run automatically.
 * You can specify a default |CalcJob| for a |Code|, making it easy to set the inputs for a code.

>  * You can submit calcualtions to the AiiDA daemon without having to worry about how to make sure that your calculation and parser plugins can be imported from the daemon's python environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * You can submit calculations to the AiiDA daemon without having to worry about how to make sure that your calculation and parser plugins can be imported from the daemon's Python environment.
```

 * Write a minimalistic ``setup.py`` script:

    .. code-block:: python

        from setuptools import setup

        setup(
            name='aiida-add',
            packages=['aiida_add'],
            entry_points={
                'aiida.calculations': ["add = aiida_add.calcjob:ArithmeticAddCalculation"],
                'aiida.parsers': ["add = aiida_add.parser:ArithmeticAddParser"],
            }
        )

 * Move your two scripts into a subfolder ``aiida_add``:

   .. code-block:: console

      mkdir aiida_add
      mv calcjob.py parser.py aiida_add/

 * Install your new ``aiida-add`` plugin package:

   .. code-block:: console

      pip install -e .
      reentry scan

After this, you should already see your calculation plugin listed:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ verdi plugin list aiida.calculations
      $ verdi plugin list aiida.calculations add

Launching your calculation now becomes easier:

 * In ``calcjob.py``, change the default  ``parser_name`` to ``'add'``

 * Simplify your ``launch.py`` script:

    .. code-block:: python

        from aiida import orm, engine

        # Setting up inputs
        computer = orm.load_computer('localhost')

>         code = orm.Code(remote_computer_exec=[computer, '/bin/bash'], input_plugin_name='add')

Reviewer: This is actually adding complexity, adding the `input_plugin_name` right? And there is no benefit to it here.

Author: > And there is no benefit to it here.

This is not true. Adding the input plugin is what allows using the builder.

        builder = code.get_builder()
        builder.x = Int(4)
        builder.y = Int(5)
        builder.metadata.options.withmpi = False
        builder.metadata.options.resources = {
            'num_machines': 1,
            'num_mpiprocs_per_machine': 1,
        }

        # Running the calculation & parsing results
        output_dict, node = engine.run_get_node(builder)

>         print("Parsing completed. Result: {}".format(int(output_dict['sum'])))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        print("Parsing completed. Result: {}".format(output_dict['sum'].value))
```

    .. note::

        ``output_dict`` is a dictionary containing all the output nodes keyed after their label.

>         In this case: "remote_folder", "retrieved" and "sum".

Reviewer: Why not put this after the first launch script?

Author: There were already other comments made there, so I decided to delay it.
But you are certainly correct that it would fit there as well.

 * Launch the calculation:

    .. code-block:: console

        $ verdi run launch.py

Finally instead of running your calculation in the current shell, you can submit your calculation to the AiiDA daemon:

>  * (Re)start the daemon to update its python environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * (Re)start the daemon to update its Python environment:
```

   .. code-block:: console

>       $ verdi daemon restart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      $ verdi daemon restart --reset
```

 * Update your launch script to use:

    .. code-block:: python

        # Submitting the calculation
        node = engine.submit(builder)
        print("Submitted calculation {}".format(node))

    .. note::

        ``node`` is the |CalcJobNode| representing the state of the underlying calculation process (which may not be finished yet).

 * Launch the calculation:

    .. code-block:: console

        $ verdi run launch.py

You can use the verdi command line interface to :ref:`monitor<topics:processes:usage:monitoring>` this processes:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ verdi process list

> This marks the end of this howto.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This marks the end of this how-to.
```

> The |CalcJob|  and |Parser| plugins are still rather basic and the ``aiida-add`` plugin package is missing a number of useful gimmicks (package metadata, documentation, tests, CI, ...).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The |CalcJob| and |Parser| plugins are still rather basic and the ``aiida-add`` plugin package is missing a number of useful features, such as package metadata, documentation, tests, CI, etc.
```
